Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic obstructive
disease of the airways. An exacerbation of COPD is defined as shortness of breath,
cough, and sputum production. New therapies for COPD exacerbations are examined in
clinical trials frequently based on the number of exacerbations that implies
long-term study due to the high variability in occurrence and duration of the
events. In this work, we expanded the two-state model developed by Cook et al. where
the patient transits from an asymptomatic (state 1) to a symptomatic state (state 2)
and vice versa, through investigating different semi-Markov models in a Bayesian
context using data from actual clinical trials. Of the four models tested, the
log-logistic model was shown to adequately characterize the duration and number of
COPD exacerbations. The patient disease stage was found a significant covariate with
an effect of accelerating the transition from asymptomatic to symptomatic state. In
addition, the best dropout model (log-logistic) was incorporated in the final
two-state model to describe the dropout mechanism. Simulation based diagnostics such
as posterior predictive check (PPC) and visual predictive check (VPC) were used to
assess the behaviour of the model. The final model was applied in three clinical
trial data to investigate its ability to detect the drug effect: the drug effect was
captured in all three datasets and in both directions (from state 1 to state 2 and
vice versa). A practical design investigation was also carried out and showed the
limits of reducing the number of subjects and study length on the drug effect
identification. Finally, clinical trial simulation confirmed that the model can
potentially be used to predict medium term (6–12 months) clinical trial outcome
using the first 3 months data, but at the expense of showing a non-significant drug
effect.